so welcome everyone and to this lecture
on graph conventional
networks um
okay so this is the outline of the
lecture
so first i will go quickly um on the
traditional
coordinates the architecture and then i
will introduce
graphs and i will also
remind definitions of convolutions to
extend it to two graphs then i will
represent
two classes of graph coordinates
the first one is what i call a spectral
graph of let's and the second one is the
spatial graph problems
and we'll talk a little bit about the
benchmarking graph neural networks
and finally i will conclude
okay so let's start with the traditional
covenant
so we all know coordinates are a
breakthrough in computer vision
so when uh for the imagenet competition
you know for the
image classification task um when
combinate was used
uh they decreased by almost a factor two
the error
of classification it was in 2012 and it
was basically the end
of uh and crafting features and we shift
the paradigm to and crafting learning
systems
and now for this very specific task we
all know that we
we go to superhuman performance
coordinates are also a breakthrough in
speech
and natural language processing so a
facebook when you want to translate you
are also using
coordinates so contents are powerful
architectures to actually solve high
dimensional
learning problems so we all know about
the curse of dimensionality
so if you have an image let's say 1 000
by 1 000 pixels so it's you have 1
million variables an image can be seen
as a point in a space of one million
dimensions
and for each dimension if you sample by
using um
by using 10 samples then you have a 10
to the power 1 million
possible images so these spaces are
really huge
and of course this is the question how
do you find the needle of information in
this big
haystack so covenants are really
powerful to extract
basically this this information of the
best possible representation
of your of your image data to uh to
solve problems
of course we don't know yet everything
about
yeah we don't know yet everything about
convnets so it's a kind of a miracle how
and how powerful how good they are and
it's also quite exciting because
this opened many research areas to
understand better and to develop new
architectures
okay so when you use convnets you are
doing an assumption
and the main assumption that you are
using is that your data
so images videos speech is compositional
it means that it is form of patterns
that are
local so you know this is the
contribution of urban envision so
if you are at this layer for this neuron
this neuron is going to be connected to
a few neurons in the previous layer
and not all neurons okay so this is the
local reception field
um assumption then you have also the
property of stationary
stationarity so basically you have some
patterns
um that are similar and that are
shared across your image domain okay so
like
the yellow uh the yellow patches and the
blue patches so they are they are all
similar to each other
the last property is the article so you
make the assumption that your
data is hierarchical in the sense that
your
low level features are going to be
combined together
to form a medium level features and then
this medium feature are going to be
again
combined to each other to form higher
and higher
abstract features
so um so any convent work the same way
so the first part of the architecture is
to extract
these conventional features and then the
second part will be to solve your
specific task
you know like classification
recommendation
and so on and this is what we call you
know end-to-end systems and the first
part
is to learn the features the second part
is to solve your task
okay okay let's see
more precisely what is the data domain
so if you have images volumes
or videos basically so for example you
can see this image and if you zoom in
this image
what you have is a 2d grid okay you have
a 2d grid
this is the structure of of the domain
of this image
and on the top of the of this grid you
have some features
so for example in the case of a color
image you will have
three features which are red green and
blue
okay now if i'm looking at
um natural language processing so like
sentences
you will have a sequence of words and
basically you can see that you know as a
1d grid
and on the top of this grid for each
node of the grid you will have a word
okay so a word can be represented by
just
an integer for example the same also for
speech
so what you see here is um the variation
of the air pressure
and it's the same you know it's like you
have the support is a one degree
and each for each node of the grid you
will have
the the air pressure value okay which is
which is a real number
so uh i think it's clear we all
we all use all the time grids and grits
as you know as
very strong regular special structure
and for this for this
um for this structure this is good
because we mathematically we can define
the confident operations like
convolution and pulling and also in
practice it's very fast to do it
so everything everything is good now
let's look at you know
new new data so for example social
networks
okay so you want you want to do your
task for example would be to do
advertisement
or to also make recommendation so for a
social network
i'm going to it's going to be clear but
i'm going to show you that if you take
two notes so for example
you know you have this user let's say
this user i and user j
and all the others you see that this is
not a grid
okay so the connection the pairwise
connection between all users
they do not form a grid they have a very
special pattern of connections
and this is basically a graph okay so
uh how do you define your graph you're
gonna see the connection between users
so
if i user i user j are friends you're
gonna have you know connection and then
for this you are going to use what we
call an adjacency matrix
which is just going to record all the
connection or non-connection um between
notes
in your in your social networks okay and
on the top
of your network uh for each user you
will have features
so for example you have you know
messages you have images you have videos
so they form you know some feature in a
d dimensional space
in in neuroscience
in brain analysis for example we are
really interesting to understand
uh you know the fundamental relationship
between structure and function of the
brain so they are really um
connected to each other and it's very
fundamental to understand that we also
want for example to predict
uh neurodegenerative disease different
stages of this disease
so that this is very important um for
this we need to understand the brain and
the brain
if you look at the brain the brain is uh
composed
of what we call region of interest okay
and this region of interest if you take
one region of interest
this region is not connected to all
other regions in the brain actually they
are only connected to a few other
regions
so it's it's and again you can see
nothing to do with the grid
okay so this special connection
uh between different region of the
brains they can be measured by the
structural mri
signal and then you also have an
adjacency matrix
between region i and region j and and
here you have a strength of connection
which depends how many
connections how many fibers do you have
to connect region iron region j
okay and then on the top of this graph
so if you look at the region i
then you will have activations you know
functional
activation which is basically a time
series that you can see here and also we
can record this
activation of the brain with a
functional mri
okay the last example i want to show you
is in quantum chemistry
so for example the task would be to
design
new molecules for drugs and materials
so so you see again the connection
between atoms has nothing to do with the
grid
okay it really depends um how you're
going to connect
your atoms and then you will have you
know molecules
so uh so the connection between atoms
they are called bond
um and you have you know different kind
of bonds they can be a
single bond double bond aromatic bond
and you have and you have also different
features like energy and many other
features that you can use
from from chemistry um
for for the node of the graph so they
are atoms and again you you
you may have different features like the
type of atom
if it is you know hydrogen if it is
hazard
all this all these types you have also
the 3d coordinates you have the charge
and so on you may have
multiple features
okay so um and it's not uh
the list actually goes on to give you
example
of graph graph domains so you also have
you know computer graphics
with 3d meshes you also want maybe to
analyze
transportation network and the density
of of cars or maybe i don't know
trains you have also you know gene
regulatory network
you have knowledge graphs um world
relationships
you know users products where you want
to do recommendations you have also seen
understanding you want to
give more common sense to your computer
vision machine so you want to understand
the relationship between between your
objects
you also have you know for example if
you want to detect
high energy physics particles so you
have characters and the captures are not
you know structure as a regular grid so
for
all this you see that there is a
denominator
uh which is basically you can represent
all these
um problems as graphs
okay and
and here is the command setting i would
say the mathematical command setting
for all these uh problems um
so the graphs uh let's let's call it
uh g okay they are defined by three
entities so the first entity is going to
be the set of vertices
so usually you are going to index the
set of vertices from one to n
n is is the number of nodes in your in
your graph
okay so for example this will be the
index one
two three and so on then you will have
you know the set of edges basically they
are the
connections between um between the notes
and finally you will have the adjacency
matrix a which will give you the
strength of the connection
of your of your edge okay um
okay then you have graph features so
for example for each node not i or not j
you will have
some um some node features so it's
basically a vector
of dimensionality dv okay
the same also it's possible that you can
get
you can get h features and it's going to
be a vector
of dimensionality d e so for example for
molecules
the node feature maybe you know the atom
type and the edge feature may be the
bond type to give you an example
and finally you can have also some graph
feature okay
for all for the whole graph you can have
some feature so again
it's um it's a vector of dimensionality
dj
and and in the case of of uh of
chemistry that that
that may be the molecule energy
okay so this is um i would say the
general definition of graphs
okay so now what i'm going to do is that
i'm going to talk about convolution
and the question how do we extend
convolution to graphs
okay so first let me remind you um
the classical way to use convolutional
layer uh for grids when we use
confinets for computer vision so
let's say um i have this image
and or maybe this is some uh you know
hidden uh feature at layer l okay
and i'm going to do the convolution with
uh
some pattern or kernel um
that of course i will learn by back
propagation and then i will get some
activation
okay so this is the the features at the
next layer
so to give you maybe some dimensionality
so for example n1 and 2 is going to be
the number of pixels
in the x and y direction and d is the
dimensionality
of uh of each pixel so if this is a
color image the dimensionality is going
to be
three for the three colors and if this
is like
intermediate uh hidden feature maybe you
have 100 you know dimensions
for the kernel usually you take small
kernels because you want to know the
local reception field so that might be
you know three by three pixels
kernel or five by one five by five and
of course you have d
because you need to uh to respect the
dimensionality of your input
uh after input features
okay so maybe for this one so you see
that uh so you are going to convert this
image with
this feature which is oriented in this
direction so you will
basically identify uh you know
lines in in in this direction of the
image
so that was just an example and we use
padding right right now right so we have
the same dimensionality of the
uh yes yes absolutely against padding so
you basically you don't reduce the size
of your image
right yeah okay
so so how do we mathematically define
convolution
so the first definition is to do is to
see
convolution as a template matching okay
so so template matching so here is the
definition the mathematical definition
of a convolution so what you're going to
do is that
you are going to take your template you
are going to take your image
and then you are going to sum over
um the index in the whole
image domain omega okay of wj
and this is going to be a product
between
vector w j and vector h i minus g
okay so this is the pure definition of
convolution
and what we do usually in a in computer
vision is that we don't take minus
we take plus okay and we call that
because because when when we do that we
have the definition of correlation
and this is this is you know because
it's more uh
like it's it's exactly like template
matching okay so it doesn't change
anything if you if you do i minus j or i
plus j in the learning sense because the
only thing that you do is that you flip
up and down and left and right your uh
your
your your kernel and when you learn you
it doesn't change anything basically
okay but this is the definition of
correlation so it's it's really a
template matching
and then i'm going to take for the
notation i j okay
so basically and yeah and something very
important that you have here is that
you when when we do um convolutional
layers we are using
kernel with compact support you know
like a 3x3 it's very small support
when we do that we don't do the sum over
the whole domain the
image domain we just do the sum over the
neighborhood
of the node i okay and this is very
important it's very important because
suddenly
the sum is not over the whole pixel it's
just you know
um in the neighborhood and then the
complexity of doing convolution is
actually um
to the order of the number of nodes so
the number of pixels
in your in your image so so the
the complete is quite easy to to compute
so what you're going to do is that
you're going to take your
uh your pattern you're going to slice
your pattern so it's going to be n
slicing because n number of locations
and then you're gonna do you know a
scalar product of three by three
elements and and you're gonna do you
know um
um the vector a
product of vectors of dimensionality so
you see the complexity of doing this
operation is just
n times three times three times d so the
completed is n
and and again everything can be done in
parallel if you have a gpu the
computation that you are doing
in this in this location is independent
to the competition that you're doing in
this location so
everything is is linear complexity
okay so doing that uh okay
so so at the end of the day if you want
to do convolution with template matching
you're just going to compute this
um scalar products between your template
and between uh your your image
um i would say your image patch okay
um okay so something that is very
important to see
in the case of the graph being
grid so this is for standard convolution
in computer vision
if you look at if you are looking at you
know your template which is here
okay so you see that i'm going to give
some
node ordering j1 g2 j3 and so on to g9
and this node ordering is actually very
important
okay because for for all time i mean
it's not i mean this this notes so for
example the node g3
will always be positioned at the same
location so it's
always going to be at the top right
corner of the pattern
okay so that's that's very important why
it's very important so let me go to the
next slide
so why it's very important is so when i
will do the convolution so the pattern
matching
again i will take my my pattern and i
will slice the pattern
over my image domain okay so that would
be maybe here
and i put it here and and also this is
position i position i prime that i put
here
so when i'm going to do the template
matching between
the kernel and the image what i will do
is that for
this index so the index g3
it will always match you know the
information
in the image at this index here
okay so this is very important so
you when you have a grid the node
ordering the node positioning
is always the same whatever the position
in your image
so when you do the template matching
between index g3
and this index here in the image you
always compare the same information
you always compare the feature uh at the
top
right corner uh of your pattern and the
type of corner of the image patch
okay so this um this
uh you see this matching scores they are
for the same information
okay so that's very important now let's
look at what happened for graphs
okay so the question is can we extend
this definition of template matching for
graphs
and there are two main issues so the
first issue
is basically on a graph you don't have
any uh ordering of your notes
okay so on the graph you you have
no given position uh for your notes so
let's say for example
i have this uh graph template
okay so there are like four notes with
this connection and i have this
uh vertex here the thing is for this
vertex
i know nothing about the position the
only thing that i know
is the index okay so maybe this is the
index number three
for this one and then when i when if i
want to use the template machine
definition what i'm going to do is that
i need to match you know this
uh index with other index uh
in the graph domain so this is my graph
and let's say this is for
the node i and they are the neighbors of
the node i so
for this neighbor this is the index the
same index j3
but here i mean how can i match
you know this information with this
information when
i do not know if they match to it they
mature to each other
because on the graph you don't have any
ordering of your notes
you don't know if it's not it's for the
top right corner
of any information you don't know that
so on the graph you have no notion of
where is the up where is the down where
is the right where is the left
okay so when you do this matching
between
uh this feature vector and this picture
vector actually this matching usually
generally has no meaning okay you
you you don't know what you compare to
each other okay
and again the index is completely
arbitrary
okay so you can have the value 3 here
but it can be here
the value number 2 or value number 12.
you you don't have
this is this is not you know any good
information
so basically because you don't have any
ordering of your notes on graphs
you cannot choose the definition of
template matching
you cannot use that directly so we need
to do something else
okay the second issue with template
matching for graphs
is what happens if um the number of
nodes in your template
does not match the number of nodes you
know uh
in your in your graph so for example
here i have four nodes
here i have four nodes fine maybe i can
find a way to compare
the two in the two sets of of nodes but
here i have
uh i have seven nodes so how i'm going
to compare seven nodes to four nodes
so that's also you know an open issue
okay so the third mathematical
definition was to use template matching
to define convolution
now the second definition is to use the
convolution the convolution theorem
so the convolution theorem from um from
fourier is basically the fourier
transform of the convolution of two
functions
is the pointwise product of the fourier
transform this is what you see here
okay so the fourier transform of the
convolution of
a function w and function h is the
fourier transform of f
and point twice multiplication the
fourier transform of h then if you do
the inverse for your transform
you go back to your to your convolution
so nice
okay we have a very um nice formula to
do the convolution of w and
h and but the thing is in the general
case
doing the fourier transform is n square
complexity we come back to that
however if you if your domain uh like
uh like the image grid has some very
particular structure
then you can reduce the complexity to n
log n uh by using you know
uh fast fourier transform okay so the
question is
can we extend this definition of
uh of convolution theorem to graphs
so the question is how do we redefine a
fourier transform
for four graphs okay and
and the thing is how to make it fast
okay so remember that
in the case of uh of template matching
uh
we have linear complexity so how do we
have a fast spectral convolution in
linear time
for compact kernels so that's that's the
two open question
okay so basically we are going to use
these two definitions
of convolution to uh design two classes
of graph neural network so the
this will be the template machine will
be for the spatial graph cornets
and the conversion rotary i'm going to
use that for the spectral graph net and
this is the next
the next part that i'm going to talk
about now
okay so let's talk about
how we do spectral convolution okay
so i there is a book that i like very
much
uh which is the book of uh fan chung
which is
a spectrograph theory so there is
everything in nice like
harmonic analysis graphery combinatorial
problems and optimization
so i really recommend you know people to
read the books
they want to know more and a lot more
about about these
these questions so how do we perform
spectral convolution
so we are going to use four steps so the
first step will be to do
would be to define graph application
second step
will be to define fourier functions then
we will do
fourier transform and eventually
convolution
theorem okay
so the what is the graph location so the
graph calculation
this is the core operator in spectral
graph theory okay
so remember how we define a graph we
have a set of vertices
a set of edges and then we have the
adjacency matrix
so if the graph has n vertices the
is a n by n matrix
so we are going simply to define the
laplacian which is
also going to be an n by n matrix to be
the identity
minus the adjacency matrix and we are
going to normalize
the adjacency matrix by using
the degree of each node so d is
basically a diagonal matrix
and the diagonal each element of the
diagonal is basically the degree of the
node
okay so we are doing and this is called
the normalized location
okay so this is i would say this is by
default the definition of
uh laplacian that we use for for graphs
so we can interpret uh this uh this
operator
so the laplacian is this combination so
the a was that matrix with basically all
zeros
and the one was representing the
connection between
edges right um yes so
uh for facebook for example i would say
that this is exactly the definition so
if not a user i is
a friend with a user j then you will
have
adjacency matrix value will be i j equal
to one
and if two users are not friends
then you will get the value zero but
sometimes you have a real value
for a for example for the for the brain
connectivity graph
the value of aij is the degree of
connection between the two regions so
basically what we
say the number of fibers that connect
region i and region j so that can be
binary that can be also a continuous
value
and also this is symmetric if it's non
oriented graph
otherwise yes so yeah for
usually it is symmetric uh and you want
you want the symmetry for for
mathematical reasons
um but you may have some not so here
this is the normalized elevation but if
you have the random walk
laplacian then this is non-symmetric
okay
so it's um it's it's different
definition of the application so
in the case of laplacian it's very
interesting so in the continuous setting
you have only one definition for the
application this is called the laplace
beltrami operator
in the discrete setting you have
multiple definitions you can do your own
definition of the application depending
on on the assumptions
that that you are going to use i
understand
thank you okay so we can interpret the
application so the application is
nothing else than a measure of
smoothness
of a function on a on a graph
so this is nothing else then you you see
you see so i'm doing the elaboration
that i reply to a function
h okay on the graph and i'm looking at
what happened
at the vertex i and if i expand this
definition
i will have the value of h i minus
the mean value of the neighborhood okay
so basically if your signal is smooth
you know if it doesn't vary much
then this difference will be very small
but
if your signal you know there is a lot
it oscillates
a lot then the difference will be very
high so the laplacian is nothing else
and a measure of smoothness of function
on a on a on a graph
okay all right so
now let's define fourier functions so
let's let's take the
laplacian matrix and let's do a little
bit of linear algebra
let's do eigen decomposition of the
graph operation
so when you do eigen decomposition you
will have the
you will you are going to factorize your
laplacian matrix
into three matrices so you have a phi
transpose
lambda and five so this
matrix five of the size n by n actually
uh have the what are the laplacian
eigenvectors
okay for each column and the laplacian
they are called the fourier functions
okay the famous fourier functions
and of course this is an orthonormal
basis
um so when you do the the product
between two bases you will get one
if they are the same and then you get
zero if they are orthogonal
if they are different this is also an
invertible matrix this
guy so this matrix this is the
diagonal matrix of the laplacian
eigenvalues
so lambda 1 to number n
and and we know that for the normalized
application
that these values are bonded between
zero and between
two so this is the maximum value that
you can get this guy
the laplacian eigenvalues they are known
as the spectrum
of the graph okay so if you take a graph
here you have 27
nodes if i compute the laplacian
eigenvalues and if i put them
i have a signature of the graph which is
called the spectrum of the graph
okay that which would be different for
each each graph
okay and here you have okay this is what
i say so this is
doing um again decomposition so if you
take your
laplacian matrix and you apply to a
vector
phi of k then you will get the
eigenvalue lambda k times the same
vector
phi of k okay so this is the definition
of the um
eigen decomposition okay so you see that
fourier functions they are nothing else
than
the laplacian eigenvectors
okay let me illustrate uh these uh
fourier functions so we actually we
already know uh for your functions
uh if you if you take the greater for
example you take here a one degree
and you compute the fourier functions so
you so you will get a phi
zero okay then you will get phi one
which is this one which is smooth phi
two which is less a little less mousse
and
phi 3 and so on and so on so this is
well known this is the cosine function
and the semi-zoids and we use that you
know for
for image compression so if we take an
image and we project the image
on the fourier functions then the image
is going to be the the transformation is
going to be sparse
so you only keep you know the highest
coefficient and you can do compression
so this is something that we've used for
a very
long time for for graph for the graph
domain this is this is quite interesting
so you see that this is a graph and i'm
computing here the
the first uh four uh you know fourier
function of the graphs
so you see for phi one uh you still have
oscillations you know between positive
and negative
value the same with positive and
negative value and and here as well
um what is interesting is that this
oscillation
uh depends on the topology of the graph
okay
so so it's related to the to the
geometry of the graph like communities
like hubs and so on and we know that uh
so for example
if you want to capture k communities on
graph
uh a very good algorithm is to apply
k-means on the first key
fourier functions if you do that you
have something that we call spectrograph
theory
and it's it's a it's a huge literature
uh
and and if you want to know more about
this there is this very nice tutorial by
van looks pro
about about spectrograph clustering and
using all these notions of fourier
functions
okay okay now let me introduce you
a fourier transform okay so for this i'm
going to
do the fourier series for your series if
is nothing else
then you take a function h defined on
your graph
and then you are going to decompose this
function using the fourier function
okay so i take my function h i project
my function
h on each fourier function
phi of k and i will get you know
this coefficient of this fourier series
it's going to be a scalar
multiply by my function phi of k okay of
the time and
n by one of the size and
n by one okay so and doing that you know
just projecting my function on the
fourier functions
give me the fourier transform okay so
the fourier transform
is is just you know the coefficient of
the fourier series nothing else
okay then h you know is basically
a linear combination of the fourier
transform times
the the fourier functions okay i can
rewrite
everything in matrix vector
representation
and these guys so doing the um phi
times the the fourier transform this is
actually the inverse for your transform
okay so let me summarize this
if i do if i project h on the fourier
functions i will have the fourier
transform okay so i'm taking
the matrix of the fourier functions and
multiply by h so this is n by
n by n this is n by one so this is n by
one
okay uh and now if i do
inverse fourier transform of the fourier
transform
okay so i would have phi of um
fourier transform of h and this guy is
here
okay so i just put phi transpose h
and we know that um the the basis
is orthonormal so this guy is actually
identity function
that am sorry identity matrix okay so
this is energy matrix so i come back to
h so so the inverse for your transform
is is of of the fourier transform is h
obviously okay so one thing that you can
observe is that
the fourier transform and the inverse
fourier transform
can be done in one line of code okay you
just take
your vector h you multiply by this
matrix and that's it
and the same also to do the inverse for
your transform you take your your signal
and you multiply by this matrix so it's
basically just linear operations
uh just multiplying a matrix by a vector
and this is how you do fourier
transforming inversely transform on
graphs
okay now let's let's do the convolution
theorem
so again the convolution theorem the
fourier transform
the fourier transform of your um the
free transform of the convolution
is is going to be the pointwise product
of the fourier transform of
each signal okay so let's say i have um
w convolution h uh so i'm going
first to do the fourier transform of w
then
this is going to be a vector of the size
n by one
then i'm going to multiply point twice
by another vector which is the fourier
transform of
h okay so how do we get the free
transform just by doing
phi transpose w and phi transpose h and
then i'm going to do the inverse fourier
transform to come
to go back to the spatial domain so i
just multiplied by the matrix five
okay and by n so this is what i write
here
okay i have phi i have um
w hat which is a fourier transform and i
have this
this i'm going to change it i'm going to
change it to this line what is this line
um shouldn't there be a phi transpose
before w hat
sorry shouldn't there be a 5's transpose
no the inverse fourier transform is fine
okay
so you do phi and you multiply by the
fourier transform which is a phi
transpose w
which i call hat w
so i'm going i'm going to use that a lot
uh i will come back to this
and then here you have the fourier
transform of h which is just phi
transpose h which is here
okay so this guy um
okay this guy is actually what we call
the spectral function
okay the spectral filter so this guy is
a vector of n by one
okay and i'm writing i'm writing here uh
this vector here
so you see this is a vector of uh n
elements
and this is actually the spectral
function
which is um evaluated
at the at the uh at the eigenvalue
lambda 1 which is here so this is this
point here
then you have a w uh hat
number two which is this this value here
and so on and so on okay
and then i'm going to rewrite this you
know i'm going to put this
uh in a diagonal okay so i will do
diagonal of
this vector so this will create a matrix
of the size
n by n okay and i'm putting this guy
back here
so i'm going to change the the point
twice multiplication of this vector n by
one and this vector
by one by the matrix vector
multiplication
and it's going to be the same right this
is a diagonal matrix which contains this
guy
multiply multiply by this by this vector
so this it's exactly the same these two
lines but what i want to do that
because i want to get rid of the
parenthesis okay so i don't have the
parenthesis anymore
and i have just you know matrix matrix
multiplication
okay so this is this is what i get
um then i'm going to do something is
that we know that when you apply a
function
on the eigenvalues okay if you have some
orthogonal basis
then you can put it inside you can put
it inside and this is what i do here
i put phi and phi transpose inside
and this guy is precisely the definition
of the application
okay the operation uh when i do the
again the composition
is phi launder file transpose
okay um then so
what i have is basically the spectral
function
that i applied to the application uh
operator
and this is n by n uh matrix
and applied to the vector n by one so at
the end i would get
an n by one vector okay so you see that
if you want to do so it's important now
so if you want to do
a convolution of two functions on graph
w and h
what you're going to do is that you're
going to take the
spectral function of w you will apply it
to the
uh to the laplacian and then you
multiply by h
okay this is the definition of uh
of spectral convolution okay and and the
thing is
this is very expensive uh in practice to
do it why it is expensive
it's because the matrix phi is a
full matrix okay it contains uh
the n uh the n um fourier functions
and they are not zero okay so it's a
dense matrix and you are going to pay
the price of n square
and you don't have any fft because the
thing you don't have any fft
for uh for general graph okay so this is
a
this is this is a lot and why it is a
lot because n remember
and this is the number of nodes in your
domain
so if you have um if you have a big
graph for example if you have
uh the web the web has you know billions
of nodes n is equal to the billions so
you need to do b
and square which is going to be a huge
computation to do so
you cannot really do it
can i summarize so h is going to be a
function defined
over every vertex in your graph right
uh and w instead is going to be like a
kernel as well or is he
but w is going to be a function
like this so w is a spectral function w
hat
is the spectral function so you are
working
in the frequency space in the frequency
space you are working with this
what this is this is a spectral function
so for example
if you if you know image processing a
little bit so for example if you want to
do image denoising
if you want to do image denoising what
you what you know is that
you know that the noise is usually in
the high frequency part
of your image of your signal so what you
can do is
that you can design a spectral filter
which is going to be zero
for the high frequency and you are going
to preserve you know the low frequency
to preserve
your your geometry so this is just you
know doing filtering
of the frequencies you know contain in
your signal
okay okay but the wd without the hat
would be still a small guy right would
be a small
uh filter exactly so w without hat
is the special filter yeah the small one
right which is exactly so
exactly so if you have the grid w will
be
you know a three by three uh a three by
three you know the
patch for example now
i see okay okay okay
thanks yeah sure um so
in the context of graph uh so it's it's
a small property um
to know is that you don't have any
shifting values um
so if you have a grid and if you are
using the convolutional
um theorem uh to to move around you know
your function for example the function
is aggression here on the grid you are
not going to change the shape of your
function
but on a graph because you have you know
uh irregular structure
if you move around your gaussian then
you will have different shapes
okay so this is something that that you
lose when you go
to graphs but in practice actually it
has absolutely no effect so it's not
really important it's just
a mathematical property that you lose
when you go to graphs
okay there is another question there is
another question i got here
so can you ask can you remind us what is
actually the overall goal here
what is the goal of defining these
convolutions or the spectral
correspondence over these graphs i think
uh maybe it's not yeah if we can remind
everyone it's going to be
yeah so so what i'm trying the the goal
of the lecture
is to define a convolutional
graph convolutional nets okay
so i need to redefine a convolution
in the case of graphs and there are two
ways to define convolutions
uh you can do convolution with template
matching or you can do convolution
with a graph spectral theory
so what i'm doing here um i'm i'm
redefining convolution in the case of
spectral theory and then i'm going to
use this definition
of convolution to define
graph convolutional nets so my goal is
just to define convolution in the case
of graphs
so i can i can i can design a graph
convolutional nodes okay sounds great
okay so let's go to um now okay so now
the first part was okay i defined a
spectral convolution now i'm going to
use
spectral convolution to define gcn
okay okay so the first model
what i call vanilla spectral gcn was
introduced
actually by januka and his collaborators
so
john brenner zahamba and
archer slam in 2014 i think it was for
the first uh
iqr conference um and what they did
they did you know the the simple uh idea
to do
okay let's let's let's uh you know
define a graph uh spectral convolutional
layer
so we know what is you know a standard
convolutional layer so you you this is
the activation at the next layer
a plus one this is your non-linear
activation so this is for example
um and then i'm going to do the spatial
filter so
the template wl convolution by hm okay
so this is
in the special domain uh the graph
domain
and then i'm going to do that and
remember that what i just defined
so doing this convolution in the
spectral domain it's just doing that
okay so this is the spectral filter
apply to the application and then you
multiply by hl
okay so this guy is is a
i can decompose this guy i will get the
fourier
matrix times the spectral function that
i apply to the
eigenvalues uh phi transpose hm
okay and and and this is my uh this is
my spectral filter
okay so i do not work directly here okay
i work directly here
and and here the thing that i'm going to
learn
i'm going to actually to learn this
function
w hat number one so i'm going to learn
um the spectral filter and i'm going to
learn it by back propagation
okay so i don't need to um
you know handcraft the the the spectral
filter i don't need to do that
this will be learned by by propagation
so that was really
a great idea to do it and this was the
first spectral technique
but but it has some limitations so the
first limitation is that you don't have
any guarantee of special localization of
filters
uh so remember that uh what we want we
want to have the local reception field
because it's it's a very good property
to be able to extract
uh you know multi-scale um multiscale
feature which is scale patterns
from from your signal so you don't have
you don't have this guarantee
the second thing is that how many
parameters do you need to learn
so you need to learn n parameters
okay you need to learn this w hat number
one to
do when you have number n so it's n
parameters so
if again if the graph is is large
like uh like like the the web you know
or facebook
then this is gonna be billions uh of
parameters to learn
and this is for each layer so it's gonna
be really huge and again the learning
complexity is going to be n square
because your phi is a dense matrix so
so we need to improve this okay so
so uh so jan and his collaborator so
they improve
the improved true properties so the
first property was
okay how do we get localized
spatial filters okay so for this
what what they propose is to um okay to
get
um localized special filter so you want
something which is localized
uh what you need to do is to uh compute
smooth spectral filters something very
smooth like this
okay so why do you why do you want
smooth spectral filter
it's because if you are smooth in the
frequency space
then you are going to be localized in
the space domain
okay so this is in physics you know the
eisenberg's entity principle
and you can see that you know with the
personal identity
if let's let's say that k is equal to
one if k is equal to one you have the
first derivative of
uh of the spectral function so if you
want this to be
small okay so you're going to have a
smooth function
and for k equal to one you see here is
this is going to be the variance
of your spatial filter so if this is
small
if the variance is small it means that
you're gonna have a small
you're going to have a special filter
with a small compact
support okay so if you are smooth
in the frequency space you're going to
be localized
in the spatial space okay so you need
smoothness how do you get
smoothness for spectral feature so you
can also think about the
uh the transform of the delta of the
dirac right so we
if we have a delta in the iraq in the in
the time domain then in the frequency
we're going to have
basically a flat a completely flat
transform right
so there's another maybe a way to see uh
if someone doesn't
quite know the parseval identity yeah
exactly
right um and so so how do you get a
smooth spectral filter
so the idea is okay we can simply
decompose
you know the spectral filter to be a
linear combination
of smooth kernels okay so
the smooth kernel was chosen to be
splines
because splines are nice they are you
know with compact support
and they are smooth and basically the
idea is okay now let's learn
a vector of k coefficient uh and this is
the case muscular node
okay and you learn this coefficient by
by propagation but suddenly you know
everything is nice because you have
locality localization in space
and the number of parameters that you're
going to learn is going to be
key parameters so here for example let's
say it's nine
okay remember that before uh in the case
of
um of convolution so you have a three by
three which is which is nine parameters
so that can be the same you can have
nine parameters to learn you're gonna
you're gonna learn
a combination of nine spline functions
and and that's it so you have a constant
number of parameters to learn earlier
so this is nice but we still have you
know
the the phi matrix so we the learning
complexity
is still quadratic okay
okay so so the question is um how do we
learn
in linear time okay so how do we learn
uh with respect to the to the graph size
n so the problem of the quadratic
complexity
comes from directly from the use of the
laplacian again vectors
okay so you see that uh the thing that
is that is annoying
uh in this spectral convolution is not
this diagonal matrix
it's not this vector it's this guy okay
this is this is the phi
matrix because it's a full matrix right
it's a dense matrix
and and then and then it's n square
number of elements so this is the price
that we need to pay
so we know that if we want to avoid
the quadratic complexity we need to
avoid the eigen decomposition okay
um and and okay so we can avoid
organic position but simply directly
learn function of the application
okay so this is what what we proposed in
2016. so the spectral
function is just going to be you know a
monomial
function of the application that's it so
we just have a sum
of some parameters that we learned by by
propagation
w k and laplacian to the power of k
okay so so when we do that
uh first there is something uh which is
which is good is that
uh we're gonna have filters that are
exactly localized
in a k-hop support okay so if we have
the application to the power k
the spectral um i mean the spatial
filters
will be exactly localized in the support
of k-hop
so what is the what is the one hope
neighbor
neighborhood so let's say for example
you have this
graph and here i'm going to put a heat
source so the value is going to be 1
at this node and 0 for all other nodes
if i apply the application to this heat
source then the signal
the support of the signal is going to be
increased by one hop
so every uh basically every node
that can be reached by one jump okay
that you do that
and and if you do two jumps from this
you will
you will reach the the second hop
uh neighborhood which is your range uh
the orange
nodes here okay so if you apply the
application uh two times
this is gonna be the support okay if you
apply the application k times
then you will have the support of k-hops
so you you exactly
uh control the the size of your spatial
filters
okay so that that was the first point
the second point let me show you that
you get uh
learning complexity okay so so
again you have your convolution wh
you have your spectral convolution
definition i'm using here
as a spectral convolution um monomials
of the of the application and then i'm
going to replace this guy
so the laplacian power of k times the
vector
h by the vector x
k okay and x k is actually given by your
recursive equation
okay so recursive is always good right
so it's given by this recursive equation
which is
the application times the vector
xk minus one and the x k equal to zero
is simply the original uh function h
okay so so when i do that you see that
this sequence
x of k is generated by multiplying a
matrix
so the operation and the vector x k
minus 1.
so the complexity of doing that is the
number of edges
okay and you do it that you know k times
so number of edges
times k and the thing is uh for real
graph
real world graphs um basically they are
all sparse
okay because sparsity is structure so
remember for example for
um for for the web the web has a
billions of of web pages but for each
webpage
it is in average connected to 50 other
webpage so
comparing 50 to 1 billion is nothing
so usually and the same also for the
brain the brain it's very highly sparse
the same also for uh transport networks
so everything
every natural graph is usually sparse
because sparsity is structure
okay so so the number of edges
is you know some value times n so at the
end of the day
uh you have linear complexity uh because
for for sparse real world graphs okay
um okay so and you see here is that i'm
using the laplacian
and i never do any eigen decomposition
of the elaboration
okay um and there is so there is a bit
of
um of confusion that sometimes i see
is that so i call this spectral uh you
know gcn
but this is this might be misguided
because i don't do
any spectral uh operations like you know
i don't use any either again the
composition with the application
we i don't have any eigenvectors again
values so
so at the end of the day even if i use
you know the spectral theory
to define this gcn um
at the end of the day the computation
are all done in the special domain using
the operation
okay i don't use any i don't choose the
spectral domain
for the computation i use i do
everything in the special domain
so even we call that spectral gcn
we don't choose you know in practice and
the spectral
uh decomposition so just just one one
one command
okay and the last like the last comment
i want to do is that so graph
conditional layers again this is just
linear operations so you just multiply a
vector
a matrix by a vector so you're just
doing in operation so this is gpu
friendly
the issue um is that here you are doing
sparse linear algebra and the existing
gpu
are not optimized for that so this is i
think one of the
limitations today for graph neural
networks we need to have specialized
eyewear for graph neural networks we
need to have hardware that
adapt uh to the to the sparsity
uh of of these operations and we don't
have this today so
uh if we want this to to to get far
very far with graphene network we need
to have this this uh this specialized
hardware
what about tpus do you know whether tpus
can handle that's the same that's the
same they are optimized
for uh full uh you know linear
operations
like full matrices uh they're
specialized for that
but if you if you want to do sparse
linear algebra
you need specialized hardware to do that
gotcha
thanks yeah
okay so how do we implement um
how do we implement this and so for
example we have a signal
we have a function defined on the on the
graph so n is the number of vertices
of your graph and d is the
dimensionality
uh of uh of the feature right so for
each node
you have a feature a vector of d
dimension
okay so how we do that so we have x k
and what we do is that we are just going
to uh do a
shape stuff to do just linear operations
so
x k are going to be arranged in a matrix
you know um x bar which is of the size
of k
times nd okay so we just reshape you
know this
xk to be 1 times nd and
and we have k times nd and then we
multiply this
by the vector that we will learn by back
propagation which is of the size k by
one
okay we do that the operation will give
you one times nd you reshape and you get
n times d
so this is how how i implement it you
know
with pi torch or tensorflow that would
be the same
and this is how you do this spectral
convolution
so again the properties is that filters
are exactly localized
you have a constant number of parameters
to learn so this is a key
you know this is this is this k a
parameters that you need to learn by
back propagation
you have a learning complexity a linear
learning complexity
but the thing uh which uh which is not
good is that
um here i'm using monomial um basis
okay so i'm using uh laplacian to the
power zero laplacian to the power one
power two power three and so on okay
this is what i use here
and the thing is monomial bases are
unstable for
uh for for optimization because this
basis
you know is not too orthogonal
so if you change one coefficient then
you are going to
change the approximation of your
function so you need orthogonality
if you want to learn
with stability okay so
then you can use your favorite you know
orthonormal
basis but your favorite orthonormal
basis
must have a recursive equation okay so
this is the only thing that that that
you that you need you need
your autonomous basis to to have a
relationship equation because this is
the key
to have the linear complexity so we use
a chebychev
polynomials so this is uh something very
well known in signal processing
um so we are going to approximate you
know the spectral convolution
uh with the cheby uh jb chef chebyshev
function
the chef functions apply to h again can
be represented by
xk and xk is given by this recursive
equation
okay so it's a little more complex than
before but
in practice this is just doing again
multiplication of
uh your elaboration times the vec one
vector
okay at the end of the day the the
complexity is still linear you don't
change anything
um and this time you have stability
during your during the learning process
okay so what we did we did the sanity
check with mnist
um so and you see that so this is the
number
of vertices so so for mnist the the
graph is the standard grid
okay we use the k-nearest neighbor grid
to do that
and you see that um you have linear
complexity okay this is the
number of vertices and and and you have
this
number of of uh you have the linear
complexity so this is good
for the accuracy you get to see 99
percent of accuracy
compared to the standard n5
okay so chad net uh social
is basically combat for arbitrary graph
and we have the same linear
learning complexity of course um the
complexity constant is much larger than
than the
standard uh than the standard net
so it's something like 20 or 30. so it's
much much smaller
to learn on this but you get you know
covenant for any arbitrary graph
so that's that's uh that's what you mean
another limitation is
um it's an isotropic model
so so let me talk a little bit about i
uh isotropy versus anisotropy
so if you look at you know the standard
complex then you are going to produce
anisotropic filters like this one okay
so you see that this filter is an
isotropic
it goes in this direction okay and we
can get anisotropic
filters with standard coordinates
because we are using
a grid and on a grid we have you know
a directional we have directions we know
where is the up
where is down where is left where is
right right remember that
we know the ordering of uh of the nodes
on on the grid we know that but this is
different for graphs
we don't have any notion of direction we
we don't know where is the
where is up where is down where is left
or is right
so the thing the only thing that we can
do at this point
is that we can only compute isotropic
filters
isotropic filters means that the value
of the filter
will be the same you know for in in all
directions
uh for for for four cycles
okay for for cycles of the same radius
okay
so this is uh this is what we can get we
can only get
isotropic filters when we use a chip net
because we have no notion of direction
on arbitrary graphs
and i will come back to that i will come
back to the isotropy versus anisotropy
a bit later
okay so what we what we did also is to
uh very quickly i don't i don't have the
time now oh wow the time is uh so i need
to speed up a little bit so
we did we did expand also this um
spectral convolution from
one graph to multiple graphs so you can
do that you know it's like
extending from 1d signal processing to
2d image processing
so extension is mathematically
straightforward
to do and we did that you know for for
example for recommender systems
because we have users of movies and
users of graphs
so with that we also as i said before is
that you can use your favorite
uh you know orthogonal uh polynomial
basis
uh so we use uh kylie nets because uh
chebychev are unstable to localize
frequency bands of interest which are
basically the graph communities
we use that something a
more powerful you know more powerful
spectral functions
okay which is kind of neat okay so now
let me go to the
to the to this class of uh graph
continents that i call
special graphs and then for this class
i'm going back to the template matching
uh you know definition of convolution so
how we do clamping matching for graphs
so remember that um the main issue
um the main issue when you want to do
template matching for graph is that
you you don't have any node ordering or
positioning
for your template okay uh
we don't have any positioning so
basically with the only thing that we
have we have the
the index of the notes and that's it but
the index is not enough
to match you know information between
between nodes
um so how can we design
template matching to be invariant to
node reparametrization
okay so you have a graph this index of
the node
is maybe let's say six but
it's completely arbitrary i can have an
index with the number
122 for example so i want to be able to
do
template matching independently of the
index
of this node okay so how i do that so
the simplest
thing you can do is actually to
have only one uh you know template
vector to do the matching this is
so you don't have you know w j1 wg2 wj3
you don't have this you just have one
vector
w and you are doing the matching of this
with all other you know feature
on your on your graph okay this is the
simplest
template feature matching you can do
which is environment by node
reparameterization
and actually this property is going to
be used for most graph neural networks
today
okay so here is the mathematical
definition
um so i'm just going to do the
the product between uh the template
vector
w at layer l so this is the d by one
and and i have the vector at node j
which is also the dimensionality d by
one okay i will get to scalar so here
this is only for one feature
of course you will have to get more
features so instead of having
a vector d by one you're going to use a
matrix
d by d so this way you can get you know
d features for each node i okay
and then i so this is the the
representation at
a node i i can put everything in vector
representation
okay this is my um this is my activation
at layer a plus one it is defined on
on the graph of m vertices and it has d
dimensions
okay and and this can be rewritten as
uh the adjacency matrix a so this is
n by n matrix this is my activation at
the layer
l so this is the n by d uh you know
matrix and this is the the template
that i'm going to learn by back
propagation of the size d by d
okay so you do you do this product you
get n by d
okay so based on this template matching
of graph now i'm going to define
uh two classes of uh spatial
gcn which are the isotropy gcn
and the anisotropy gcn so let's start
with the isotropic gcn
so this is act actually as a as quite
some history
okay so uh the simplest formulation of
special gcn was introduced by
uh scarcely and his co-author so he was
in 2009 before the deep learning
revolution
and then more recently by uh thomas
keith maxwelling
um and also saiyan suk bata
and archer slam and rob fergus in 2016.
so this is actually um this graph neural
networks of what they call the vennina
graph combination nets okay this is
exactly the same definition that i have
before just here i put you know the gb
matrix
in such a way that i have the mean value
okay i just do the mean value
over the neighborhood okay but this is
exactly the
the equation that i used before okay
um and you see that so
this equation is um it can handle
uh absence of no ordering so this is
completely invariant to another or
parametrization so again if this index
is maybe six and i change to be 122 is
not going to change
anything in the computation of the of h
at the next layer it's not going to
change anything you can also deal with
a neighborhood of different sizes okay
you don't care if you have
a neighborhood of four nodes or
neighborhood of 10 nodes it's not going
to change or one or not it's going to
change anything
you have the local reception field by
design with graph neural network you
just need to look at the neighbors
and and that's it so it's given to you
you have weight sharing
okay you have weight sharing it means
that for for
all features you are going to use the
same w whatever the position on the
graph
okay so this is a convolution property
um this formulation is also independent
of the graph size
because all operations are done locally
okay you just use you know local
information
for the next from the next layer so you
can have a graph of 10 knots or you can
have a graph
a graph of 10 billion nodes it doesn't
care so you can do also everything in
parallel
and but this is limited to isotropic
capability so the w
is the same for all neighbors so it's
again it's an isotropic
model it's going to give the same value
for all neighbors okay but at the end of
the day
this model can be represented by this
figure
so um this uh
so the activation at the next layer is
basically a function
of the activation at the current layer
at
uh index at at the node i
and the neighborhood of the node i okay
and the only thing that we're going to
do basically uh
is to change the function the
instantiation of
of the function and then you will get
all family of graph
neural network by just you know deciding
a different function here but
everything is based on this equation so
again
you have your your your core
node and then you have your neighborhood
to decide what will be
the activation at the next layer
okay so i'm running out of time so i'm
not going to take too much time on this
but
what you can show is that this previous
vernier gcn
i just showed you is actually a
simplification of chebnet
so if you truncate the expansion of
chain by using the first two
chef function that at the end you end up
with the same equation so so this is
this is the relationship
uh okay so one interesting
uh gcn is graph sage
that was introduced by william in turn
lee and yuri leskovek so let's say for
let's let's go back to the vanilla gcn
so and let's suppose that the adjacency
matrix
has a value one for for for the edges
okay so i have this equation
so the thing is for this equation i'm
going to
treat you know the central vertex i
and the neighborhood with the same
template weight
okay but i can differentiate that you
know i can have a template
for the central node w1 and i can have a
template
for the one hope neighborhood okay by
doing that
you improve already a lot you know your
the performance of your official graph
neural networks
so you go from here to here so you have
again
um some templates for the central node
and the template for for the
neighborhood
okay but this is still an isotropic uh
isotopic gcn okay because you are
treating all the neighbors with the same
weight
uh here this is the mean but you can
change you can take the sum you can also
take the max
you can take also something more
elaborated like lstm
okay now more recently people um try to
improve
the uh the theoretical understanding
of uh of gcn so there was um the
graph isomorphous i i think isomorphism
networks are introduced by yuri leskovec
in 2018 so the idea is can we design an
architecture that can differentiate
graphs that are not
isomorphic so you know isomorphic
is basically a measure of equivalence
between between graphs so these two
graphs are isomorphic to each other
and of course you want to treat them the
same way but if you are not isomorphic
you want especially to treat them in a
different way okay
so so there was um a graph neural
network uh
based on this one on this on this
definition but this is still an
isotropic
gcn okay
so so now i'm going to talk about
anisotropic gcn so again
um again so i go back to what i said
before is that standard cornet can
produce
uh isotropic filters because there is a
notion of directions on grids okay so
you have this um
isotropic filter in this direction uh
gcn like a chemnet kylie net veneer gcn
graph sage and gene
they compute isotropic filters so you
have this kind of
filters that you learn during the
process but they are they are
isotropic but we know that isotropy is
very powerful
right so um how do we get back
anesthotropine graphene our networks
so you can you can get an isotropic
naturally for example
if you have edge features um
for like if you're taking chemistry
molecules you know that
the bond features can be different they
can be you know single double aromatic
bonds
so naturally you would get an isotropic
you know
gcm and again if we want to
design um a mechanism for isotropy we
want this mechanism to be independent
with respect to the node parametrization
so to do that
we can use for example h degrees and
so that was proposed by monet edge gate
that we propose
um in getty gcn or attention mechanism
uh
in get and the idea is what what i put
here as an illustration
okay so um here you're going to treat
your neighbors
in the same way okay so with the same
template
but you want you want to treat your
neighbors in a different way right
if this is j1 you want a different
weight than if it was for j2
what do you want that is for example if
you want to analyze
graphs you know that you have
communities of people
um which are different for example i
don't know if it is politics you have
republicans and democrats
so you don't want to know to have the
the same analysis for for the same group
of people
so you want anisotropy for graph that
that's quite important
okay so the first model uh who deal with
endoscopy was monette so he was
introduced by federico monty
michael bronstein and their co-author
and the idea was to do
was to use gmm so gaussian mixture model
and to learn the parameters of the
gaussian mixture so
here they have k washington model and
they learn the parameters by using the
degree
of uh of the graph
um then there is also gat so uh it was
developed by
peter velikovic and uh joshua banjo and
their co-author
was basically to use the attention
mechanism developed
by jimmy badeno yeshua banjo
to introduce anisotropy in the
neighborhood allegation function
okay and so this is this is what you see
here
so you have um you're going to
concatenate so it's a multi-head
um wiki and architecture and here you
have uh
this weight which are basically the soft
max
um on the neighborhood okay you do the
soft max on the neighborhood so
some info some um some notes will be
more important than the others
you know by given by soft softmax
what we use um with um thomas laurent um
and me in 2017 we we use a simple uh
age uh getting mechanism which is which
is
which is you know what a sort of soft
attention process
compared to the sparse attention
mechanism of your show avenger
and and here what we did also we use
edge feature explicitly
and this actually recently we discovered
that this is very important for edge
prediction task if you have explicit
explanation task
this is important to keep it okay
so so this is the model that we used
uh okay um
then okay so if i take transformer and
if i if i
write down the equation of the graph
version of transformer this is
that i would get okay so you recognize
here the value
here you have the query here you have
the key and here you have the softmax
but the softmax is done in the
neighborhood in one hot neighborhood
okay that would be this and here i'm
going to make um
um a connection with a transformer of
uh vesmani and and their and his
collaborators
so what is a transformer so a standard
transformer
is actually a special case of uh graph
conventional nets
when the graph is fully connected okay
so
this is a fully connected graph so you
take any node
i and this node is going to be connected
to all other nodes in your graph
and included itself okay so
if you look at this equation the
equation i just wrote before
you know if the the neighborhood
uh is this time not the one hop
neighborhood but the whole graph
then you will get you know uh the
standard equation that
if if you do nlp and and transformer you
will recognize
directly okay we saw this last week so
just exactly so that's that's a nice
connect and that's a
transition so so you see you have the
concatenation so this is multi-head you
have the softmax
the query the key and the value and then
you have the weight
uh for the meeting head so and the only
thing that i do here mathematically just
having the neighborhood
uh that that use you know all connection
and when i do that so there is the
question so what does it mean to do
you know graph convolutional nets
for fully connected graphs and i think
in this case
it becomes less useful to talk about
graphs because when you when you have
each data connected to all other data
then you don't have any more you know
specific graph structure
because the graph which is what is
really interesting is graph is the
sparsity structure
right like the brain connectivity like
uh you know
the social networks what is interesting
is not everything to be connected to
each other
it's only to have a sparse connection
between between between the nodes
so i think in this case it would be
better to talk about sets
than to talk about graphs and and we
know that we know that transformers are
set
neural networks so so in some sense
instead of you know looking at you know
a fully connected graph
with with uh with feature the thing that
we should look at is more a set of
features
and transformers are really good you
know to process uh sets
of uh of of feature vectors
um okay so so there is a lab um
that i i uh i put here
so um the lab is based on um so this is
the gate gcn so
the model i'm i i propose and this is
with ggl so this is the deep graph
library so it was developed by nyu
shanghai by professor zanzen and uh
and and here this is the link to the lab
so if you click on this link you will go
directly
to the lab uh and this is this using
google google collab so you will just
need a you know a gmail account to
access to this and you will be able to
run it
on on the google cloud and what i put
here i put really you know
the the only the the most interesting uh
functions that you need to develop
uh a gcm so uh so so maybe tomorrow uh
yeah tomorrow tomorrow we're gonna be
going over everything okay perfect
okay okay so and and here
uh i again you know i put some comments
on the code
yeah and also yeah also understand dgl
uh how how dga works so probably you do
that tomorrow yes yes
nice okay so let me
now i'm going to the answer let me talk
a little bit about um benchmarking
graph neural networks so recently we
um we have this paper of benchmarking
networks so why we did this matchmark
because
if you look at you know most published
um
gcn papers um most of the work actually
use small data set like a quora
rtu data set and only one task the
classification
and when i you know when i started doing
some experiment on that i just realized
that
if you use gcn or if you don't use an
egcn you will get statistically the same
performance
because the standard deviation is very
high for the small data sets
so so the thing is um we
we cannot identify you know good uh gcm
uh we need we need we need something
else
and also recently so there has been you
know a new
theoretical development for for gcm
and the question is you know how good
they are in practice
it's important to to have some good
mathematical justification but
you know we need to be able to prove
that this is something that is useful
and and i think also benchmark i think
very essential to make progress
uh in many fields um like you know of
course deep learning with imagenet
by faith lee um but the thing is what i
upsell is actually
the people are quite really time to give
credit to benchmarks
um anyway so we introduced this open
benchmark
infrastructure so it's it's on github
and it's based on pi torch
and dgl and we introduced you know six
new medium scale data sets
for the four fundamental graph problems
like you know graph classification
graph regression not classification and
edge classification which i think
if you cover these four fundamental
problems you you already
know quite a lot about the performance
of your of your gcn
can you spend a few words more about
these four fundamental graph problems i
think we haven't mentioned them
so far i think yeah um exactly
but but well so what i mentioned is
basically the first part of any you know
convolutional nets
is how do you extract a powerful feature
the rest is quite easy
no if you want to do uh regression you
just
use an mlp if you want to do
classification you should use mlp with
cross entropy
and the thing i think is is i mean i can
take more time to do that but
what i present is i think is more uh you
know uh
is more interesting than doing just
these these guys
but would you give me another hour we
could do that
i was making the point that i i think i
understand now how we can build a
basically a representation of a graph
but then so you would have like this uh
basically uh feature
per node but then how would you go from
this feature per node to the final
task so maybe we can mention this such
that we can give someone sure
so so what you do basically um
so for example if uh so you have feature
exactly so you extract convolutional
features per node
and and then suddenly if you want to do
for example graph classification
so what you will do you will do some
kind of aggregation
you know function on this feature node
so for example
the most common one is to do the average
so you do the average of all
feature nodes and then on the top of
that you use an mlp and then you will do
classification
uh of of your graph and this would be
for always the same kind of structure of
the graph or you have different
structures like different numbers of
nodes so is it like
would you use if you use the mean it's
completely independent of the number of
nodes
right right right the same so if you do
the sum if you do the max
so you have many operators which are
independent of the number of nodes
[Music]
and yeah so so we have this and um and
this medium says uh
this medium size are actually enough you
know statistically separate
the performance of graph neural networks
so we make easy you know for new users
to add a new
new graph graph models and also new data
sets
and this is this is the link to the to
the repo so
let me now explain the graph neural
network pipeline
so a standard graph neural network
pipeline is composed of three layers
so the first layer is going to be an
input layer and it's going to make an
embedding
of the input node and edge features then
you will have
a series of kraftner network layers and
finally you have
a task layer so there will be a
prediction layer for
graph node and edge task
let me now describe in details you know
each of these three layers
so for the input layer um so again we
will have you know the input node and
edge features so this comes
from the application that can be you
know a node feature for example for
um you know for recommend for
recommender system for products so it
will give you you know some feature of
your product
so what you will do is that you will
take this um
this raw feature and you will make you
know an embedding a linear medium
and you will get a vector of d
dimensions we can do the same
if we have some edge feature we can do
an embedding of the input
edge feature and we'll get a vector of
the dimension
so basically the output of the embedding
layer will be
um for h it's going to be a matrix
of endnotes and d dimensions for the
features
for the edge is going to be a matrix of
e the number of edges
times the the number of features
and then so we will give that
and we will give you know this output
of the embedding layer it's going to be
the input of the
graph neural network layers
okay which is which is here
then what we will do is that we will
apply our favorite
graph normal layer
a number of l times okay so we have
um the the node and the edge
representation
at layer l it will go through uh the
gnn layer and it will give you node
representation of h
and e at the next layer and we will do
that you know
l number of times this will give us you
know
uh the output of the graph network
layers
and again it's going to be a matrix of
endnotes and d dimensions
for the nodes and for the edges is going
to be a matrix of
e which is the number of edges times the
dimensionality
okay so this is the output of our graph
and all network layers
and then finally for the last layer so
this is
you know task based uh layer so
if we if we are doing some prediction at
the graph
levels what happened is that we are
going to take you know
the the output of the kraftner network
layers and we're going to make a mean
with respect to all nodes of the graph
okay so this will give us a
representation of the graph
of the dimension then we will give that
through to an mlp multi-layer perceptron
and it will give us you know
a score which can be a scatter if we are
doing some graph degradation
like you know chemical property
estimation
or it can be a classification
if we are trying to classify you know
molecules to
some classes
we can also have you know a nod level
prediction so what we will do is that we
will take
the node representation at the output of
the graph neural network
and we will give that to an mlp and we
will get a score
for the node i which can be a scalar for
regression
or can be a k dimensional vector for
classification
we can also do you know edge level
prediction
so we have a link between node i and
node j
uh it's going to be concatenation of the
you know the graph neural network uh
representation for node i and not j
we give that to an mlp and again we'll
have a score for the link
between node i and j and it can be
regression or classification
okay so quickly because i'm running out
of time so
the task you have the graph
classification task the graph regression
path sorry
so this is for molecules so here we want
to
predict you know the molecular
solubility
and here you have the table so this is
like you know
agnostic gcn so we don't use any graph
structure
the lower the better and and here this
is isotropic
gcn and this is anisotropic gcn so
usually you will see
that for most experiments um
anisotropic gcn do better job than than
isotropic
gcn because you use some of course on
directional property
so this is for graph regression this is
for graph classification so you have
super nodes
of um of images and you want to classify
the the image to belong to one of
the classes uh you also have
h classification so this is here the
combinatorial optimization problem of
tsp so the traveling salesman problem
so you have a graph and then you want to
know if this edge belongs to the
solution
so if it belongs to a solution this is
the class one and if it doesn't belong
this is class zero
and we see that here you need explicit
edge feature so you see that the only
model that does a good job compared to
the naive
stick is is by using explicit um
edge feature okay so here i'm using i'm
using
this combinatorial example to make a
workshop announcement so this is also
what we
organizing next year with jan
[Music]
organizing a workshop on combining deep
learning and combinatory optimization
which i think is very interesting
directional research
okay conclusion um so
we generalize the covenant to data on
graphs
for this we we needed to redesign a
convolution opera
operator on graphs so we do that for
template matching
which lead to the class of special gcn
we also did that with a spectral
convolution which leads to the class
of spectral convolution per spectral gcm
we have linear complexity from
real-world graphs
we have gpu implementation but yet it's
not optimized for the gpu that we
we have today we have universal learning
capacity so this is uh the recent
theoretical works
and we can do that for multiple graphs
and also for graphs that that that can
change you know
dynamically application so i'm happy
that now that
i don't need to justify anymore the why
we are doing graph conventional nets to
to anybody so it's it's getting more and
more application
uh we see that at the nice uh at the
last um
actually this week um
iclear uh conference so um
the the the keyword that gets you know
the most uh
improvement was graph neural networks
and and
you can have you know you have now you
know a workshop and tutorials on
graphical networks at
many of the top uh deep learning and ai
conferences
and this is um the first probably
tutorials on graph
deep learning that we we organized at
norips in 2017 and cdpr
and also if you want some materials to
uh to look more so we have this
ipam workshop um
organized in 2018 and also a follow-up
in 2019
and for this we have the video talks so
if you want to know more about this
uh so yeah thank michael writer so you
saw banjo michael bronstein
felicia monty chattana joshi
uh g willie yo leo
thomas lawrence archer slam only michael
duffy are playing
earlier so thank you
thank you it was really impressive and i
think everyone here was stunned by your
the quality of the slides and your
explanations we
really really enjoyed like i'm getting
so many private messages here i'm
it's like like everyone's pretty very
excited
um i i have actually a few questions if
you
have some time left yes um
we haven't talked about generative
models um
do you have any any words about like how
we can for example
generate i don't know like new proteins
for
uh i don't know uh figuring out whether
we can
find a cure for this kovid right now
just you know
actually like how do you say current
question for the current world
yeah absolutely so so yeah the community
is also working on the graph
generative models so you have two
directions
the first direction you can do it in a
recursive way so
um what you're going to do is that you
are create you know your molecule atom
after atom okay so you create you you
start with an atom
then you have a candidate for the next
atom and also the next bound between the
two atoms
and you can do that you know it's a kind
of lstm style
and the second direction is to do it you
know
in uh in one shot so you need um a
network that can
that can predict
uh what is the length or the size of
your
uh of your molecule and then uh
and then what are the connection so you
have this two direction you can do it in
a recursive way or you can do it in one
shot
so they are they are different um so the
community
is more interesting in the recursive way
today um
and i i have a paper on the one shot and
basically they are they are performing
the same i mean
it's uh i don't i don't see any any
difference
but you can do it yeah so the only thing
is how do you treat
yeah how the question is your molecule
can have different uh
size uh and this is the key
um this is the key uh
[Music]
i would say the challenge here so how do
you deal with different sizes
but we have different options to do that
which is very interesting related to the
chemistry of that is that so graph what
i want to make is that graph neural
network
in some sense are too much flexible
okay so um what you need so
when you go from from the standard of
net
um so this this as you know the grid is
very structured
okay so you can get a lot of information
for the structure
of the grid but you don't have this in
graph again you lose
you know um the node ordering and
everything
so we need to find a way to you know to
have more and more structure inside the
graph neural networks
one way to do that is uh the
architecture so the architecture for
example you would like to combine
uh for example if you do uh chemistry
you would like to combine schroedinger
equation
you know like hamilton energy so people
are doing that yes to constrain better
you know your graph neural network so
again
graphene network are in some sense um
you know too much flexible you need to
find a way
to to add more um universal you know
constraints
yeah actually about the universal
constraints i got here a question uh
what do you mean by universal learning
capacity
yeah so this is the recent works on
rafale network so people are trained to
um
in some sense you're trying to classify
your neural networks right there are
many publication neural networks
so how do you classify them so you need
to find mathematical properties like you
know isotropic properties anisotropic
properties
and more recently there are you know
theoretical work on you know
isomorphism and you know um
exposibility of craft neural network
depending on some class
of of theoretical
graphs graphs are you know starting by
earlier like two 200 years ago so we
know a lot about graphs
and we want to classify graphs according
to some mathematical property
so this is what i was i was trying to
mention that
um uh you can you can design graph
neural networks
for some special mathematical properties
let's see
thank you um guys feel free to ask
questions you can
also write to me if you're too shy i
mean i'm not shy i can just read
uh i have a question and thank you so
much for this great lecture uh and
you mentioned that you created like a
benchmark data set
uh type of like uh so people can
benchmark their different graph neural
networks
um but i i feel like a lot of those
networks also learn
some like representation in the graph
and a lot of downstream tasks could be
like an unsupervised setting
where i think in the benchmarking data
sets you're
all just using accuracy uh more or less
so it's like you have labels ground
truth labels so
it's more in the supervised setting so
do you have any thoughts on how we could
benchmark like the graph network's
performance in an unsupervised
setting or i don't know like some
semi-supervised setting
um or like by measuring their
performance in some
common downstream tasks or application
uh i would like to hear your thoughts on
that thank you
so i think this is one of the most
favorite uh topics of jan
and the self-supervised
yeah that's right uh yeah as you can
tell i brainwashed
the students in the class really well
yes yes so that's why i'm asking
no of course i mean um of course
one important question um is um
you you want to to learn efficiently
right you don't want to have too much
labels to be able to
to predict well so so self-supervised
learning um
um is is one way to do that right you
want to um and you can do that also with
graph right you can
you can hide some part of the
information of your graph and then you
can predict
this hidden information to get you know
a presentation
so um i guess now it's hard for me to
follow
uh the recent all the recent gcn work
but
i guess if you google it there will
probably be already one or two papers on
this on this idea
i mean there is nothing special with gcn
so you can apply the same ideas like
self-supervised learning
to gcn so we don't we don't put that in
the
in the benchmark yet it's a good idea so
that's something maybe we
we could do so actually arguably
uh all of self-supervised learning
actually exploits some sort of graph
structure
right so when you do
self-supervised running in text for
example you take you know you take a
sequence of words
and you learn uh you know to predict uh
a word in the middle of missing words
whatever they are uh there is a graph
structure and that graph structure
is uh how many times a word appears
uh you know some distance away from
another word so make
um you know imagine you have all the
words and then you
uh you say you know within this context
you know make a graph between words
so this would be a very simplified
version of it but make a graph that
indicates
uh how many times this word appears at
distance
three from that uh from that other word
right
then you have another graph for distance
one and another one for distance two etc
right so that constitutes a graph and
it's a graph that sort of indicates you
know in white context two words
seven simultaneously appear um you can
think of
uh uh you know a text as you know
basically a linear graph and
you know the the neighbors that you take
uh
in a you know when you train a
transformer basically you know sticking
a neighborhood in this graph
right so um when you do metric learning
uh the type of stuff that is trying
talked about
uh you know using contrastive training
where you have two samples that you know
are similar and two samples you know are
dissimilar
this basically is a graph it's a
similarity graph that you're using
you're saying you're telling the system
here are two samples that are linked
uh because i know they are similar and
here are two samples that i know are not
linked because i know they're dissimilar
and i'm trying to find a graph embedding
essentially you can think of
those neural nets are learning a graph
embedding for nodes
so that uh nodes that are linked in the
graph have similar vectors and
nodes that are not are dissimilar
vectors so
there is a very very strong connection
between self-supervised running
and uh uh you know kind of the graph
view of uh of a training set
i don't think it's been exploited or
kind of realized yet
by a lot of people so there might be
really interesting stuff to do there i
don't know what you think about this
have you but
yeah exactly this is completely related
to the you know on the on the graph you
don't have any
uh non-positioning and what you are
saying and is exactly that so how do we
get you know
positioning between notes that are
relevant to your particular application
and and and you want to do it in a
self-supervised way
because because then you will learn you
know all possible you know
configurations and you don't need to
to have labels to do that so yeah this
is the point see
you will get if you if you know how to
compare you know
um notes so basically how do you extract
positional encoding then you you will do
a great job you know
that's that's that's that's one of the
most important uh question in graph
neural networks and also for
for nlp and many other applications
great
thank you a question just arrived here
uh so could you possibly highlight the
most important parts of graph
with attention i think we maybe have
gone a little fast
there and someone got a little bit lost
yeah so uh graph attention network so
the first technique was developed by
joshua banjo peter
will actually wix and uh so it's
probably you know the first work you you
you would like to see
um but you can also do like uh you can
take you know the transformer
the standard transformer and then you
can make it you know a graph
version it's it's quite straightforward
to do it
just by multiplying the just by
multiplying with the
urgency agency matrix right yeah exactly
so
you can already do it you know with spy
touch transformer so there is a mask
exactly with a minus infinity yeah
exactly so if you put minus infinite
with soft max you will get zero exactly
so i think i'm gonna show these tomorrow
so
they are yeah exactly so you can already
do graph you know transformer very
easily with
with spy touch but the thing is it's
it's going to be a full matrix
yeah so so it's going to take you it's
going to it's going to use a lot of your
gm
memory because there are many values
that you don't need
so if you if you want to to scale to
larger graphs
then you need something that exploits
the sparsity like dgn
or python geometric for example yeah so
last week we coded by
by from scratch so we we actually see
all the operations inside
and then maybe we can just add one
additional matrix there just to make
like this
masked part such that we can retrieve
the graph convolutional net from the
code that we already
have written so that would be i think a
connection
for tomorrow and hold on there are more
questions coming
is there any application where using
chebnet
might be better than spatial gcn
um so
i would say they are part of the you
know isotropic
um this is the class i uh yeah this is
what i call you know isotropic uh gcns
so um
uh for me i mean of course it will
depend on your data
and you will depend on your task you
know if you have some tasks where your
data is uh
you know isotropic this kind of
information then chemnet will do a very
good job
uh for sure now if you have information
where the topic is important for example
for social networks
you don't want you know to treat people
the same way the same
you don't want to treat the neighbors
the same way then is not going to do a
good job so it really depends on on your
task
where isotropy is is very important if
isotropic is very important then you
should use
net because chemnet you know is using um
all bit of information about your graph
in an isotopic way
and if you are using you know gcn the
veneer gcn you are just using you know
the first two terms of approximation of
gemini
yes it is there we can learn the edges
right we can learn the representation
for the edges such that they
discriminate between neighbors right
no no no this is um no this is that this
one is isotropic
oh okay okay isotropic what i mean by
isotropic is that
if um if you have a pure isotropic
you know uh graph problems then you
should use a chemical
otherwise but otherwise yeah it's better
to use enzotropic
of course
more questions guys i'm really um hey i
have a question thanks for the talk
uh i was wondering a lot of these
methods require
a existing adjacency matrix and for
uh some problems for example like you
don't you know that there is a graph
structure but you don't know the
underlying connections
do you know of any work that addresses
this problem
yeah absolutely so um so far most works
uh
focus on having already you know the
graph structure
and and and of course uh you
like sometimes sometimes you just have
data like for example you know you just
have a set of
uh set of features and and you want to
learn you know some graph structure
it's very hard very very hard
so um there are some works you know
doing that
so they are trying to learn some some
graph structure at the same time they're
trying to learn
you know another presentation uh so
that's that's promising that that's
that's interesting
and this is also somewhat that i'm
trying to do now but i can tell you
it's very hard to do and especially
because um if you
if you if you let you know the adjacency
matrix to be a variable
then you are n square okay you have n
square
unknown parameters to learn so um so
it's uh it's not easy um but yeah this
is a
so i would say that these techniques um
there are many natural
that are coming with graphs okay you
don't need to build any graphs
and this is already giving you you know
a lot of
of good tools now if you can give me
maybe
what you have in mind what kind of
application you have in mind what you
want to use you know when you want to
learn graphs
uh at the same time maybe we can talk
about it so i can tell you xavier of
course
zimming uh you know will will correct me
but
zooming is actually uh working on uh
predicting uh protein function predict
uh
you know protein function prediction
basically and and so the underlying
graph would be the
for example a contact map or the the
kind of proximity graph of different
sites on a protein
and you don't have that i mean in most
cases you don't that's that's kind of
one of the things you
you have to predict so you could view
this as some sort of related
you know graph variable let's see maybe
you had some other idea
in mind yeah i i think actually so the
more specific
problem is that uh some of these graphs
you know the edges
and you uh you know some of the edges
but you
don't know the other ones for example in
protein function prediction
you can imagine like two proteins that
have um similar functions as having an
edge between them
um but they might not have the same
function so you don't know sort of the
edge weights and you kind of have like a
human labels that are inaccurate so
uh you know that they're connected in
some way but you don't know the edge
weights and you know that
there are other proteins that should be
connected but you don't have labels for
so i guess this is more of a graph
completion problem yeah and but
and this one is easy this one if you
have it's like the semi you know the
semi
graph clustering problem so if you
already have some label
just a few labels and you have some
structure around this
that's something you can you can live
with uh if you are absolutely no
structure on the edge
and then you need to learn the graph
that is very hard
i see okay thank you
hey i have a question about uh
uh splits of the data when you're
actually training
a graph neural network um because it's
uh
like can you talk about some of the
things that you would want to consider
when actually splitting the data into
say training and validation
um like you might want to have uh
all of the nodes in the training data
for it to actually be exposed to
everything that's
um in in the in in the graph data
um and you might have a case where
different types of edges are
imbalanced in the data set um can you
talk about when that would be important
what are some of the considerations in
splitting the data training
sorry i'm not sure i understand the
question so you are talking about uh
unbalanced training sets uh
yes and also like so if you have like a
huge relational
uh data set right um
you can talk about some of the
considerations for uh
for splitting the data when you're
trying to train a graph network
so for a condition on the data sets um
so you may have you know millions of
small graphs
and it is fine i mean because this graph
neural network they're independent
of the size of your graph so uh so this
is this is not issue to learn some
good graphene representation there is no
issue with that now
if you have unbalanced data set um
i don't know um so that's maybe you can
maybe apply some standard techniques to
uh
to do that so uh you can also you know
for cross entropy for example you can
you can weight your cross-entropy
depending on the size of each class
so that may be something you can do yeah
but i
never you know thought too much about
this
okay thank you
any more questions i'm still getting
things written here but
you can voice yourself if you are
i have a question actually uh first of
all thanks a lot for the lecture at this
time especially for you
so how do you deal with cases where the
nodes do not have the same dimension
like if i want to run a small
simple vanilla graph convolutional
network but my nodes
are something like even for facebook uh
people
and then pages and i want different
dimensions so how do you think about
graph
like very a very simple graph neural
network in that
uh nothing it has nothing to do with
graph neural networks if you have
different dimensions for your vector so
probably you need to
to to put everything on the same
dimension and then you need to use some
indicator function
like one when you have the information
and then when you don't have any
information and this will be used
during the computation of the loss and
then when you back propagate you
if you if you don't have any feature
information you will not use it
but i i don't think he has anything to
do with graph neural network
okay thank you
hold on you're writing i'm reading so
much
so maybe i don't understand the question
but i will read it
out loud anyway uh is there any gcn
which can work on multiple
urgency matrices together for example
a bidirectional graph i don't know what
this mean
so if the question is about hyper graph
so you know you may have more than one
age uh connecting your nodes yes there
are some work
about this it's an extension to natural
extension mathematically
so you can yeah you can do that there is
a there is no limitation to go to hyper
graph
it's fine and there are now some data
sets
for this for this task so
if there is a an application
so students would be interesting to do
yeah it's there is already
data set and papers okay uh another
question would be
does it make sense to have notes that
are features of a person
and do graph classification or have
notes as person and do
node classification
i don't know i don't know um so
often you know people ask me the
question can i do a graph given this
data
so it's really task dependent i think
it's ready you know
when when it's going to be useful or not
when you get you know some good
relationships
um because what is the graph you know
it's just a collection of pairwise
you know uh or pairwise connections so
that's it
so the question is when when it is
relevant
to solve your task sometimes it is
relevant sometimes it's not
so it really depends on the on the yeah
it's obvious but it really depends on
the data
and and the task you want to solve so
yeah yeah the
student is satisfied with your answer
i think we run out of questions unless
there are more
coming my way uh
no it's it starts getting bright outside
there
exactly exactly it was notice here the
sun is rising
uh that's nice okay i think
that was it uh thank you so so much it
was like
i mean really those were so pretty uh
these slides were so pretty
i i i had to learn so much from
the way it teach this world um
yeah thank you again uh for waking up so
early
i mean i think this is a fascinating
topic you know as you know i've been uh
involved in this at the beginning and uh
i think it opens a completely new door
to applications of machine learning and
neural nets
you know it's a new world it's
completely different world um i know
your
phd advisor had been working on you know
graph signal processing for a long time
so this was kind of a natural
transition for for him and for you i
guess but um
uh i you know i i think we haven't seen
the the end of this we'll we'll uh
we're going to be surprised by what's
going to come out of this i mean there's
really already sort of fascinating work
in that area in high energy physics in
computational chemistry
in uh you know social uh
network uh applications and uh
you you kind of cited all the big names
in the you know if you are interested in
this topic if you're listening to this
yuri leskovitch is is one of the big
names you know in addition to xavier
obviously but
um and uh jean broner whom you know
because he's a professor here and he
talks about it in in this
in this course uh mikhail bronstein uh
is also a big contributor he's made some
really interesting uh
uh contributions to the to the topic
also on sort of different methods than
the one
uh that you talked about today uh on
like you know
uh like you know using graph
neural nets for like 3d meshes and uh
for computer
graphics and things like that so um i
agree i think
i think this is also a field you know
where
there is a back and forth between you
know mathematics
and also applications so if you look at
for example this protein stuff
it's very very hard but at the same
times we can learn a lot you know from
the mathematical side
we can we can and it's very exciting
right because you want both if you want
to be able to make
a scientific discovery you need to be
you know um uh driven by some
real world very hard problem and then at
the same time you have these new tools
you know coming up with a
graphic neural networks and
and it's a way also for us to better
understand you know why neural networks
work so well
and and this is you know a direction
where
it looks like you know each day they are
like a new problem in this in this
direction
so the pie is big and for everyone for
for the young students to come and
to uh to enjoy you know this this area
of research
great well thank you again and uh enjoy
your day
yeah thanks again thank you so much guys
all right bye-bye bye-bye guys see you
tomorrow